As you will recall,
the control plane SS7 is now
a completely packaged switched fabric, and
the signaling is out of band from
the voice traffic or data plane.
This is a busy picture.
But I just want to convey how SS7
was leveraged to provide
mobility quite seamlessly.
PSTN in the picture, it stands for
Public Switched Telephone System
sometimes, also called parts,
plain old telephone system.
In this picture I'm showing two cellular
networks both of them connecting to
a PSTN network,
all through the SS7 fabric.
On the cellular side
you have two databases,
HLR for the home location register, and
VLR for the visitor location register.
The HLR has all the details of
all the subscribers who have
subscribed to the service.
Their SIM card, their phone number,
their billing status.
And when you go to your city or a country,
the Visitor Location Register,
VLR, in that particular network
will contact your Home Location Register,
HLR.
And gets all the details and
temporarily stores them in the VLR.
We also talked about multiple base
stations that you connect to as
you drive around.
So many such basestations,
a group of them are connect to BSC or
the basestation controller.
In the European side this is called RNC,
radio network controller.
Both of them do exactly the same job.
They coordinate between
different basestations,
the towers, and
the mobile switching center.
So when you are on your phone and
you turn on your phone.
When you see three to five bars,
what it means is the phone has
found a base station nearby.
And the base station ask the HLR
if you are a legit customer,
through authentication.
Maybe you are not paying all your bills.
And the HLR's recognized you and
gave go ahead to the base station.
And if you're roaming,
there is an additional step that the VLR
contacts your HLR and
brings all your information.
So, what this means is variable
UR when your phone is on, the system
keeps track of which base station
is closest to you,
even when you are in a far, far place.
When someone calls you, it goes to
the mobile switching center, MSC,
and it finds the right play station
where you are and drops the call to you.
The same thing happens when
someone sends you a text,
this is handled by a different module
on the network called
Short Message Service Center, SMSC.
In reality, these are very,
very complex processes but
I just wanted to give you
a flavor of how mobility works.
And how the SS7 from
the wireline telephony
was very easily leveraged
to give you mobility.